feat(oke): Create OKE nodes with Ubuntu images. (#271)
canonical/ubuntu-cloud-docs: oracle/oracle-how-to/deploy-oke-nodes-using-ubuntu-images.rst

Deploy OKE Nodes using Ubuntu Images
====================================

Ubuntu images are available for worker nodes on Oracle Kubernetes Engine (OKE) in Oracle Cloud. Currently there are only a select number of suites and Kubernetes versions supported due to this being a Limited Availability release. 

> Available Releases

Author: I understand the confusion, we're intending to have more rows here once we add support for focal and jammy along with more k8s versions too. Having said that, definitely going to change to 'List of images' still.

Should sentence case be used with the top level title, like ``Deploy OKE Nodes using Ubuntu Images`` -> ``Deploy OKE nodes using Ubuntu images``?

------------------

.. list-table::
   :header-rows: 1

   * - Ubuntu Release
     - OKE Version
     - Location
   * - 22.04 (Jammy Jellyfish)
     - 1.29
     - `Link <https://intcanonical.objectstorage.us-phoenix-1.oci.customer-oci.com/p/vpqQtYASl8IooEZ_sxfKDnzUkF1b-3lQmXPC_rXf4zARQYoW7ncE8BGGxNqdUuGa/n/intcanonical/b/oke-shared/o/>`_

Networking Plugin Availability
------------------------------

.. list-table::
   :header-rows: 1

   * - Node Type
     - Plugin
     - Supported
   * - Managed
     - Flannel
     - Yes
   * - 
     - VCN Native
     - Yes
   * - Self-Managed
     - Flannel
     - Yes
   * - 
     - VCN Native
     - No

Prerequisites
-------------

You'll need:

- Oracle Cloud compartment to create the nodes.

- Configured and running OKE cluster on Oracle Cloud.

- Oracle's ``oci`` CLI installed.

- ``kubectl`` installed (Self-Managed only).

> Download an Ubuntu image

Reviewer: Although this is not technically wrong, the whole download/upload can by bypassed by pointing directly to the image in our storage bucket. I think this is significantly nicer. e.g.

```
oci compute image import from-object-url https://intcanonical.objectstorage.us-phoenix-1.oci.customer-oci.com/p/vpqQtYASl8IooEZ_sxfKDnzUkF1b-3lQmXPC_rXf4zARQYoW7ncE8BGGxNqdUuGa/n/intcanonical/b/oke-shared/o/jammy/oke-1.29/20240820/daily-ubuntu-amd64-minimal-22.04-jammy-v20240820-oke-1.29.img ...
```

Reviewer 2: Good catch.  This significantly reduces the number of steps and the time it takes for a user to import.

Author: Very cool, I'll look at merging the 2 sections now

------------------------

> To download an image, select a version from the `available releases <#available-releases>`_ and make note of the image path for the image you choose. The image path conforms to the following format:

Reviewer 2: I think we need a section on how to interpret the JSON listing provided by #available-release links.  It is a sorted array where the most recent image will be at the end (with the last two entries being the latest image and the latest image manifest respectively).

I'd also like to add a CLI snippet, along the lines of 
```
 curl https://intcanonical.objectstorage.us-phoenix-1.oci.customer-oci.com/p/vpqQtYASl8IooEZ_sxfKDnzUkF1b-3lQmXPC_rXf4zARQYoW7ncE8BGGxNqdUuGa/n/intcanonical/b/oke-shared/o/ | jq ".[][-2] | .name"
```
to automate getting the latest.

Design note (somewhat off topic here):
We could also create a `<suite>/oke-<version>/current` prefix in the bucket, that contains the latest image released, which might be easier to navigate/inspect.

Alternately, the following oci command will upload the object too.

.. code:: bash
  
  oci os object put --bucket-name <bucket-name> --file <file-path>

Register the Ubuntu image
-------------------------

Images must be registered to be used by Oracle Cloud services. To register an image in Oracle Cloud, navigate to :guilabel:`Compute` > :guilabel:`Custom Images` and select :guilabel:`Import Image`. 

In the form you must provide your :guilabel:`Compartment`, :guilabel:`Image name`, :guilabel:`Object name` and :guilabel:`Launch mode`. Additionally the fields :guilabel:`Operating System` and :guilabel:`Image type` must be provided and use ``Ubuntu`` and ``QCOW2``, respectively. 

Optionally, this process can be done with the following command:

.. code:: bash

  oci compute image import from-object \
    --compartment-id <compartment-id> \
    --display-name <image-name> \
    --launch-mode <launch-mode> \
    --image-source-object-name <object-name> \
    --bucket-name <bucket-name> \
    --operating-system "Ubuntu" \
    --operating-system-version <ubuntu-version-number> \
    --source-image-type QCOW2 \
    --wait-for-state AVAILABLE

> Creating OKE Nodes with Ubuntu Images

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Create OKE nodes with Ubuntu Images
```

-------------------------------------

The following steps on creating nodes assumes you have an existing OKE cluster on Oracle Cloud, but it is not required to have existing nodes. If you don't have an OKE cluster prepared then Oracle's documentation for `creating a cluster`_ is a good place to start.

> Creating Managed OKE nodes with Ubuntu

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Create managed OKE nodes with Ubuntu
```

~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

> Managed nodes are node instances whose lifecycle is managed by the OKE service. Since this is a Limited Availability release of Ubuntu images for OKE, you can only create managed nodes through the Oracle Cloud API (``oci`` CLI or SDK). The ability to create managed from nodes from the Oracle Cloud UI will be added at a later.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Managed nodes are node instances whose lifecycle is managed by the OKE service. Since this is a Limited Availability release of Ubuntu images for OKE, you can only create managed nodes through the Oracle Cloud API (``oci`` CLI or SDK). The ability to create managed nodes from the Oracle Cloud UI will be added later.
```

To create a managed node, start by copying the following cloud-init script into a file called ``user-data.yaml``.

.. code:: yaml

   #cloud-config
   
   runcmd:
     - oke bootstrap

Then, create a placement configuration file to specify where in Oracle Cloud the Managed node pool should be created and save the file as ``placement-config.json``.

.. code:: json 

   [{
     "compartmentId":"<compartment-id>",
     "availabilityDomain":"<availability-domain>",
     "subnetId":"<subnet-id>"
   }]

Lastly, replace the values and run the following command to create the Managed node pool:

.. code:: bash
   
  oci ce node-pool create \
    --cluster-id=<cluster-id> \
    --compartment-id=<compartment-id> \
    --name=<pool-name> \
    --node-shape=<node-shape> \
    --size=<pool-count> \
    --kubernetes-version="1.29.1" \
    --node-image-id=<ubuntu-image-id> \
    --placement-configs="$(cat placement-config.json)" \
    --node-metadata='{"user_data": "'"$(base64 user-data.yaml)"'"}'

> View the node pool status in Oracle Cloud by navigating to :guilabel:`Kubernetes Clusters (OKE)` and click on your cluster, then select :guilabel:`Resources` > :guilabel:`Node pools` and click on the latest node pool.

Reviewer 3: Try to use 'select' instead of 'click' whenever possible. (Since people might not necessarily be using a mouse)

Everything will be running as expected when the :guilabel:`Kubernetes node condition` and :guilabel:`Node state` of all the nodes are labelled :guilabel:`Ready`.

> Creating Self-Managed OKE nodes with Ubuntu

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Create self-managed OKE nodes with Ubuntu
```

~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

> The following instructions assumes that you have configured your OKE cluster to work with self-managed nodes. If you have not done this, refer to the Oracle documentation for `working with self-managed nodes`_

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The following instructions assume that you have configured your OKE cluster to work with self-managed nodes. If you have not done this, refer to the Oracle documentation for `working with self-managed nodes`_
```

> Before adding a self-managed node, ensure you have configured ``kubectl`` to your OKE cluster with the following command. This process will be easier if ``kubectl`` is configured for a single OKE cluster.

Reviewer 4: should this be:
```suggestion
Before adding a self-managed node, ensure you have configured ``kubectl`` on your OKE cluster with the following command. This process will be easier if ``kubectl`` is configured for a single OKE cluster.
```

Author: Personally, I think it makes more sense with 'for'. ``kubectl`` is a client that talks to your cluster(s), the OKE service itself doesn't have any configuration to use it.

.. code:: bash
  

>   kubectl cluster-info

Reviewer 3: Is that the whole command? Where is the OKE cluster specified? Is that part of what follows in the output of the command? If so, it would be nice to see that too.

Author: That's the command as a whole, kubectl defaults to using a config file that we assume the user has set up when we refer to 'configuring kubectl'.

It returns some command returns the cluster status in stdout, would it be worth adding that to the code block?

> Next, the self-managed node will need a custom cloud-init script which needs some specific values, namely a Kubernetes certificate from the OKE cluster and the Kubernetes API private endpoint.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Next, the self-managed node will need a custom cloud-init user-data script which needs some specific values, namely a Kubernetes certificate from the OKE cluster and the Kubernetes API private endpoint.
```

Obtain the Kubernetes certificate using ``kubectl`` with the following command and note that ``[0]`` is the index of the cluster if only one is configured:

.. code:: bash

   kubectl config view --raw -o json | jq -r '.clusters[0].cluster.certificate-authority-data'

> 

Reviewer 3: Maybe include a statement about how to determine your cluster index in cases where multiple clusters are configured.

Author: Added `--minify` \[0\] flag so the index isn't needed anymore.

In summary, `kubectl` can have multiple "contexts" which represent different clusters the `kubectl` client can point to/communicate with. Only _one_ context may be active at a time, hence why we needed the index before to select the active option. With `--minify` it trims the data to only return the data for the currently active context.
 
Refs:
- \[0\]: https://kubernetes.io/docs/reference/kubectl/generated/kubectl_config/kubectl_config_view/

Reviewer 2: I think that's good and less confusing. Thank you!

> Then obtain the ``Kubernetes API private endpoint`` from Oracle Cloud by navigating to :guilabel:`Kubernetes Cluster (OKE)` then select your cluster. Be sure to copy only the IP, not the port.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Then obtain the ``Kubernetes API private endpoint`` from Oracle Cloud by navigating to :guilabel:`Kubernetes Cluster (OKE)` and selecting your cluster. Be sure to copy only the IP, not the port.
```

Alternately, use the following ``oci`` command to obtain the ``Kubernetes API private endpoint``:

.. code:: bash

   oci ce cluster get --cluster-id <cluster-id> | jq -r '.data.endpoints.private-endpoint' | cut -d ":" -f1

> Use these obtained values (certificate-data and private-endpoint) in the following example and save it as ``user-data.yaml``.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Use these obtained values (certificate-data and private-endpoint) in the following example cloud-config and save it as ``user-data.yaml``.
```

> Using your previously obtained values, insert them in the following example and save it with the name ``user-data.yaml``.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Use these obtained values (certificate-data and private-endpoint) in the following example and save it as ``user-data.yaml``.
```

.. code:: yaml

   #cloud-config
   runcmd:
     - oke bootstrap --ca <certificate-data> --apiserver-host <private-endpoint>
   
   write_files:
   - path: /etc/oke/oke-apiserver
     permissions: '0644'
     content: <private-endpoint>
   - encoding: b64
     path: /etc/kubernetes/ca.crt
     permissions: '0644'
     content: <certificate-data>

> Now, create the self-managed node in Oracle Cloud by navigating to :guilabel:`Compute` > :guilabel:`Instance` and click :guilabel:`Create Instance`. Next, click :guilabel:`Change Image` and select :guilabel:`My Images` then click the Ubuntu image recently registered. 

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Now, create the self-managed node in Oracle Cloud by navigating to :guilabel:`Compute` > :guilabel:`Instance` and then selecting :guilabel:`Create Instance`. Next, select :guilabel:`Change Image` and select :guilabel:`My Images`, and then select the Ubuntu image you recently registered. 
```

> Now, create the instance behind the self-managed node in Oracle Cloud by navigating to :guilabel:`Compute` > :guilabel:`Instance` and click :guilabel:`Create Instance`. Next, click :guilabel:`Change Image` and select :guilabel:`My Images` then click the Ubuntu image recently registered. 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Now, create the self-managed node in Oracle Cloud by navigating to :guilabel:`Compute` > :guilabel:`Instance` and click :guilabel:`Create Instance`. Next, click :guilabel:`Change Image` and select :guilabel:`My Images` then click the Ubuntu image recently registered. 
```

> Setup the cloud-init for the instance by clicking :guilabel:`Show advanced options` then select :guilabel:`Paste cloud-init script`, where you should be able to paste your completed cloud-init script (the one saved in ``user-data.yaml``).

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Setup cloud-init for the instance by selecting :guilabel:`Show advanced options`, then selecting :guilabel:`Paste cloud-init script`, and then paste your completed cloud-init script there (the one saved in ``user-data.yaml``).
```

Lastly, click :guilabel:`Create` and wait for your instance to be provisioned.

Optionally, you can this ``oci`` command to create the self-managed node:

.. code:: bash

  oci compute instance launch \
    --compartment-id <compartment-ocid> \
    --availability-domain <availability-domain> \
    --shape <instance-shape> \
    --image-id <ubuntu-image-ocid> \
    --subnet-id <subnet-ocid> \
    --user-data-file user-data.yaml \
    --display-name <instance-name>

Self-managed nodes cannot be viewed from Oracle Cloud so you can poll their status with the following command. The process for nodes joining the cluster will take several minutes.

.. code:: bash

   watch 'kubectl get nodes'

Once your nodes are in :guilabel:`Ready` state, then everything is running as expected and you're self-managed node is ready to accept pods. 

Further references
------------------

> For more information about oci CLI and managing self-managed nodes on your cluster, refer to the Oracle Documentation:

Reviewer 3: Use sentence case for the link titles

Available releases
------------------

.. list-table::
   :header-rows: 1

   * - Ubuntu Release
     - OKE Version
     - Location
   * - 22.04 (Jammy Jellyfish)
     - 1.29
     - `List of Images <https://intcanonical.objectstorage.us-phoenix-1.oci.customer-oci.com/p/vpqQtYASl8IooEZ_sxfKDnzUkF1b-3lQmXPC_rXf4zARQYoW7ncE8BGGxNqdUuGa/n/intcanonical/b/oke-shared/o/>`_

Networking plugin availability
------------------------------

The availability of networking plugins (Flannel / VCN Native) depends on the type of OKE node being used:

.. list-table::
   :header-rows: 1

   * - Node Type
     - Plugin
     - Supported
   * - Managed
     - Flannel
     - Yes
   * - 
     - VCN Native
     - Yes
   * - Self-Managed
     - Flannel
     - Yes
   * - 
     - VCN Native
     - No

Prerequisites
-------------

You'll need:

- Oracle Cloud compartment to create the nodes.

- Configured and running OKE cluster on Oracle Cloud.

- Oracle's ``oci`` CLI installed.

- ``kubectl`` installed (Self-Managed only).

> Finding an Ubuntu image

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Find an Ubuntu image
```

-----------------------

> Select a version from the `available releases <#available-releases>`_. The images are listed as JSON in ascending order, therefore the latest image will be at the bottom. After viewing the `available releases <#available-releases>`_, make note of the image path for the image you choose. The image path conforms to the following format:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Select a version from the `available releases <#available-releases>`_. The images are listed as JSON in ascending order, therefore the latest image will be at the bottom. Make note of the image path for the image you choose. The image path conforms to the following format:
```

.. code:: bash
  
  <suite>/oke-<version>/<serial>/<image-name>.img

If you wish to get the latest image path, use the following command:

.. code:: bash
  
  curl <available-releases-location-link> | jq ".[][-2] | .name"

Register an Ubuntu image
------------------------

Images must be registered to be used with Oracle Cloud services. To learn more, refer to the Oracle Cloud documentation for `managing custom images`_.

When registering images, the :guilabel:`Launch mode` is an option to configure. The suggested configurations are :guilabel:`PARAVIRTUALIZED` for virtual nodes and :guilabel:`NATIVE` for bare-metal nodes.

.. tabs::

    .. group-tab:: Using console
    

>         Start the registration process Oracle Cloud by navigating to :guilabel:`Compute` > :guilabel:`Custom Images` and select :guilabel:`Import Image`. Select :guilabel:`Import from an Object Storage URL`, then paste the `available releases <#available-releases>`_ location link with your concatenated image path into the :guilabel:`Object Storage URL` field. The URL format pasted should conform to the following:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
        Start the registration process in Oracle Cloud by navigating to :guilabel:`Compute` > :guilabel:`Custom Images` and select :guilabel:`Import Image`. Select :guilabel:`Import from an Object Storage URL`, then paste the `available releases <#available-releases>`_ location link with your concatenated image path into the :guilabel:`Object Storage URL` field. The URL format pasted should conform to the following:
```

        .. code:: bash
         
          <available-releases-location-link>/<image-path>
    
        In the rest of the form, you must provide your :guilabel:`Compartment`, :guilabel:`Image name`, and :guilabel:`Launch mode`. Additionally the fields :guilabel:`Operating System` and :guilabel:`Image type` must be provided and use ``Ubuntu`` and ``QCOW2``, respectively.

        Lastly, select :guilabel:`Import image` and wait for the registration to complete. This process is expected to take a while.

    .. group-tab:: Using CLI
    

>         The following command will directly import your image from a provided URI. You'll have the provide the values below with the exception of ``operating-system`` and ``source-image-type`` which are already provided.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
        The following command will directly import your image from a provided URI. You'll have to provide the values below with the exception of ``operating-system`` and ``source-image-type`` which are already provided.
```

        
        For more information on this command, refer to the ``oci`` docs for `import from-object-uri`_.

        .. code:: bash
    
            oci compute image import from-object-uri \
                --compartment-id <compartment-id> \
                --uri <available-release-location-link>/<image-path> \
                --display-name <image-name> \
                --launch-mode <launch-mode> \
                --image-source-object-name <object-name> \
                --operating-system "Ubuntu" \
                --operating-system-version <ubuntu-version-number> \
                --source-image-type QCOW2

Create OKE nodes with Ubuntu Images
-------------------------------------

> The following steps on creating nodes assumes you have an existing OKE cluster on Oracle Cloud, but it is not required to have existing nodes. If you don't have an OKE cluster prepared then Oracle's documentation for `creating a cluster`_ is a good place to start.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The following steps on creating nodes assume that you have an existing OKE cluster on Oracle Cloud, but it is not required to have existing nodes. If you don't have an OKE cluster prepared then Oracle's documentation for `creating a cluster`_ is a good place to start.
```

      
      .. code:: yaml
      
         #cloud-config
         
         runcmd:
           - oke bootstrap
      
      Then, create a placement configuration file to specify where in Oracle Cloud the managed node pool should be created and save the file as ``placement-config.json``.
      
      .. code:: json 
      
         [{
           "compartmentId":"<compartment-id>",
           "availabilityDomain":"<availability-domain>",
           "subnetId":"<subnet-id>"
         }]
      
      
      Lastly, replace the values and run the following command to create the managed node pool:
      
      .. code:: bash
         
        oci ce node-pool create \
          --cluster-id=<cluster-id> \
          --compartment-id=<compartment-id> \
          --name=<pool-name> \
          --node-shape=<node-shape> \
          --size=<pool-count> \
          --kubernetes-version="1.29.1" \
          --node-image-id=<ubuntu-image-id> \
          --placement-configs="$(cat placement-config.json)" \
          --node-metadata='{"user_data": "'"$(base64 user-data.yaml)"'"}'

> View the node pool status in Oracle Cloud by navigating to :guilabel:`Kubernetes Clusters (OKE)` and choose on your cluster, then select :guilabel:`Resources` > :guilabel:`Node pools` and select the latest node pool.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
View the node pool status in Oracle Cloud by navigating to :guilabel:`Kubernetes Clusters (OKE)` and choosing your cluster, then select :guilabel:`Resources` > :guilabel:`Node pools` and select the latest node pool.
```

Everything will be running as expected when the :guilabel:`Kubernetes node condition` and :guilabel:`Node state` of all the nodes are labelled :guilabel:`Ready`.

Create self-managed OKE nodes with Ubuntu
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The following instructions assume that you have configured your OKE cluster to work with self-managed nodes. If you have not done this, refer to the Oracle documentation for `working with self-managed nodes`_

> Before adding a self-managed node, ensure you have configured ``kubectl`` for your OKE cluster with the following command. This process will be easier if ``kubectl`` is configured for a single OKE cluster.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Before adding a self-managed node, ensure that you have configured ``kubectl`` for your OKE cluster with the following command. This process will be easier if ``kubectl`` is configured for a single OKE cluster.
```

Obtain the Kubernetes certificate for the current context with the following command:

.. code:: bash

   kubectl config view --minify --raw -o json | jq -r '.clusters[].cluster."certificate-authority-data"'

Then obtain the ``Kubernetes API private endpoint`` from Oracle Cloud by navigating to :guilabel:`Kubernetes Cluster (OKE)` and selecting your cluster. Be sure to copy only the IP, not the port.

Alternately, use the following ``oci`` command to obtain the ``Kubernetes API private endpoint``:

.. code:: bash

   oci ce cluster get --cluster-id <cluster-id> | jq -r '.data.endpoints.private-endpoint' | cut -d ":" -f1

Use these obtained values (certificate-data and private-endpoint) in the following example and save it as ``user-data.yaml``.

.. code:: yaml

   #cloud-config
   runcmd:
     - oke bootstrap --ca <certificate-data> --apiserver-host <private-endpoint>
   
   write_files:
   - path: /etc/oke/oke-apiserver
     permissions: '0644'
     content: <private-endpoint>
   - encoding: b64
     path: /etc/kubernetes/ca.crt
     permissions: '0644'
     content: <certificate-data>

.. tabs::

   .. group-tab:: Using console
  

>     Now, create the self-managed node in Oracle Cloud by navigating to :guilabel:`Compute` > :guilabel:`Instance` and select :guilabel:`Create Instance`. Next, select :guilabel:`Change Image` and select :guilabel:`My Images`, then select the Ubuntu image you recently registered. 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
    Now, create the self-managed node in Oracle Cloud by navigating to :guilabel:`Compute` > :guilabel:`Instance` and select :guilabel:`Create Instance`. Next, select :guilabel:`Change Image` > :guilabel:`My Images`, and then select the Ubuntu image you recently registered. 
```

>     Setup the cloud-init for the instance by selecting :guilabel:`Show advanced options`, then select :guilabel:`Paste cloud-init script`, and then paste your completed cloud-init script (the one saved in ``user-data.yaml``).

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
    Setup the cloud-init for the instance by selecting :guilabel:`Show advanced options` > :guilabel:`Paste cloud-init script`, and then paste your completed cloud-init script (the one saved in ``user-data.yaml``).
```

    
    Lastly, select :guilabel:`Create` and wait for your instance to be provisioned.

   .. group-tab:: Using CLI

    The following command will create an instance with your previously created ``user-data.yaml``. The value for ``subnet-id`` should correspond with the subnet used for the nodes in your OKE cluster.
    
    .. code:: bash
    
      oci compute instance launch \
        --compartment-id <compartment-id> \
        --availability-domain <availability-domain> \
        --shape <instance-shape> \
        --image-id <ubuntu-image-id> \
        --subnet-id <subnet-ocid> \
        --user-data-file user-data.yaml \
        --display-name <instance-name>

Self-managed nodes cannot be viewed from Oracle Cloud so you can poll their status with the following command. The process for nodes joining the cluster will take several minutes.

.. code:: bash

   watch 'kubectl get nodes'

Once your node is in :guilabel:`Ready` state, then everything is running as expected and your self-managed node is ready to accept pods. 

Further references
------------------

> For more information about oci CLI and managing self-managed nodes on your cluster, refer to the Oracle Documentation:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
For more information about ``oci`` CLI and managing self-managed nodes on your cluster, refer to the Oracle Documentation:
```
